Okay.
Believe we are low screening now. Yep. Okay.
And we'll be joined online
by our all of our submitters today.
All first submitter. Uh, sorry.
Just to confirm, for anyone watching online,
we are now commencing hearings on the International Treaty
examination of the New Zealand United Arab Emirates Close
Economic Partnership Agreement.
Uh, we have received submissions on this,
and we are hearing from submitters today.
The first of those is Mr. Solomon.
Welcome back for the committee.
Thank you. We have 10 minutes sit down.
We've seen your submission and we welcome you.
Your, uh, speaking to that, uh,
and any questions if this time? Yeah, thank you.
Oh, rung or Ma Solomon.
Um, I'm a UMA to
Naga under our mediation agreement with the Crown
Naga, uh, is meant to have genuine
and meaningful influence on negotiations From a
Ang perspective, uh,
that proved impossible with this agreement.
For example, the final draft of the U-A-E-F-T-A texts were
provided to us under strict confidentiality agreement on 13
September, 2024, uh, with a request, request
to respond within a week after providing extensive
and considered input to MFA on 19 December,
we were advised that the agreement would be concluded
only five days later.
This is not genuine
and meaningful engagement
as required under our mediation agreement, we're also
mandated to provide the three T impact assessments
of agreements as set out at the end of the crown's.
Um, NIA, uh, we note that there was less opportunity
for influence on the GGCC negotiations
because the core techs were negotiated almost two decades
ago, and additional texts were rushed
through in parallel to the UAE.
We were critical of a non-paper on Maori indigenous trades
that the Crown provided to the UAE that purported to explain
to GY and just justify various negotiation proposals.
This paper seriously misrepresented to, uh, to treat
by giving an incorrect impression
that Maori had relinquished their sovereignty
and that T Treaty was only concerned
with protection of property rights.
This is not the case. Our submission highlights a wide range
of areas that can't be covered in the allotted,
um, time of 10 minutes.
The time given to our submission is highly unsatisfactory,
and we request that in future submissions
that are more democratic
and respectful, time is allocated to
hearings, oral submissions.
Given these time constraints, I'll refer to five key issues,
but that doesn't mean the others aren't all important.
Also, firstly, indigenous people's economic
and trade cooperation.
Chapter 15, NATO engaged most intensively with this chapter.
Uh, but despite that input, this chapter follows the patent
of recent agreements.
It lacks any substantive commitments by the parties,
is unenforceable
and has no impact on the rest of the agreement.
It is impossible from the information currently available
to assess what genuinely new commercial benefits
Maori exporters may achieve
from the market access provisions.
But we note that the NIA says exporters already
received benefits, uh, of a unilateral
UAE duty exemption program.
So we cannot, we cannot see how Maori firms, especially many
SMEs, are meant to gain from this.
Secondly, the Treaty of Wang exception, the Crown continues
to misrepresent, uh, the Treaty of Wang, exception,
exception in its NOA as protecting its policy space,
space to meet its obligations under Tia Wang.
However, it well knows this is not the case.
The exception only applies to measures adopted by the Crown
to give quote, more favorable treatment unquote, to Maori
and is subject to additional conditions.
It would also not protect measures that are designed
to benefit Maori
and other communities such, such
as social procurement programs.
The mediation agreement promised to revisit this exception,
which the Crown first devised way back in 2001,
but MFA keeps rolling it over in spite of our objections.
Three intellectual property rights.
This chapter reinforces the Western intellectual property
model that Maori challenged in the Y 2 6 2 inquiry
and elsewhere, and which has no protections for the exercise
of Ranga ma Maori
or kaki responsibilities over tga.
For example, the provision on geographical indications
provides no recognition of Maori terms such as Manuka.
Instead, the sharing of information on promoting
and protecting Manuka honey is listed
as one possible error area of cooperation.
An Article 15.4
of the Unenforceable Indigenous People's Economic Trade
and Cooperation chapter, the ip, uh,
chapter's provision on genetic resources,
traditional knowledge and cultural expressions.
Article 13.35 is equally weak.
The UAE and ult.
New Zealands may establish, quote, appropriate measures,
unquote, for their protection,
but only where the domestic laws
and other international obligations allow.
They should also quote, endeavor unquote,
to create a database
or digital library for such information, a move
that carries real dangers for Maori
unless they're also, uh, exercise their Rana
or control over that information for the climate crisis.
Article 14.7 on climate change
recognizes the unique connection, uh, of indigenous peoples
to the environment, the right to protect
and develop their systems of knowledge, practices,
and values, and the valuable contribution indigenous
knowledge can make towards sustainable trade
and investments, including solutions to climate change.
Yet the article does not give a effect to that.
Instead, it promotes the kind of financial
and technological solutions
that Naau has cited in the WA tribunal's Climate Change
Inquiry is antithetical to Maori values, knowledge
and practices, and is designed to avoid changing corporate
and national practices that significantly contribute
to the climate crisis.
Finally, five, digital Trade.
The Crown recognizes its treaty obligations
and digital trade chapters following the WA Tangi Tribunal
finding that the TPPA chapter breached
its treaty obligations.
In this agreement, it has successfully included protections
for measure to meet those obligations,
providing strong protections than in the EU FTA.
And this should be used as a baseline
by the Crown in the future.
Unfortunately, the Crown has not addressed concerns about a
less fail safe protection from Maori data sovereignty
and digital governance in the schedule to the Trade
and services chapter.
The digital trade, uh, chapter is enforceable.
So a commitment to cooperate on digital inclusion has the
potential to provide positive benefits to Maori business,
especially Maori digital innovators.
Conclusion throughout its input on these negotiations,
NAOKI has emphasized the right of Maori under
WGI in the United Nations declaration on the rights
of indigenous peoples to self-determination
and to participate in decision making on matters
that affect them through representatives chosen
by themselves in accordance with their own procedures
that never occurred now recognizes
that officials were themselves under intense pressure
in these negotiations.
However, the process
and substance of these negotiations have once again,
subordinated to tgi to other priorities
determined unilaterally by the Crown breach
of its Titi obligations.
That's the end of my submission.
Excellent. Any questions?
Right? Do we have any questions for Mr. Solomon?
First question from Dr. Lauren Hunan. Thank you, chair.
Um, thank you so much Maori for your submission.
I think one of the things that we are interested, uh, okay.
I am interested in, um,
when we ask MFA about Maori engagement, you know,
they talked about the gains that have made in this
and how they have to negotiate the differences between
cultural differences between, like you said, GCC
and UAE and ot.
Um, from your perspective, hypothetically speaking, if NA to
was part of that negotiation,
how would you have negotiated differently
to ensure better protection for
or better upholding of utility,
but also better protection from an
intellectual property perspective?
Mm-hmm. Thank you for that.
Um, so Nataki has been advocating indeed,
even in the Y 2 62 claim going back 20, 30 years,
we've been saying that the Maori voice, we need
to be sitting at the table, um, so
that we can convey those issues
and our concerns directly, um, to the, so that they,
the party on the other side of the table,
the officials on the other side
of the table can fully understand what our concerns are.
And I think if we were able to do that, um, ka um,
we would achieve better outcomes.
Um, but, uh, really our voice is excluded from that process.
Just a supplementary question, I think one of the, um,
again, we asked this question last week to Amfa.
They did have someone there
and you know, pardon my ignorance,
they did have someone there, um, who is, who did express
how he spent some time there
and is working with the people when they were at UAE on
negotiating some of these,
and particularly from like a Maori perspective, I guess, um,
my question is around like, do you think that the, the voice
that is at the decision making table is not sufficient
or that,
although they may have someone there who is, um,
of my background, but the the actual engagement
itself is still lacking?
Mm-hmm. So, I, I wanna just kind of get a sense from No,
No, I, I understand the question.
Thank you. 'cause it is an important question.
And look, we, we have no doubt that, um, crown, you know,
Maori who work for the Crown are doing the
very best that they can.
Mm-hmm. But they're giving largely
still a Crown perspective.
Um, NAA is, uh, a nationally mandated body,
the only nationally mandated body in this particular trade
space, international trade space.
And so we want to, we, we require to have unfiltered,
um, and have an independent voice at the table so
that our concerns can be directly, uh, articulated
and, uh, um, our perspectives put, uh, unfiltered
through a crown process.
Well unfiltered through, um, uh,
another voice, if you will.
That's really helpful. Thank you. Very good. All right.
Thank you very much for your time this morning.
Appreciate your submission on the NZ Thank you.
Economic partnership agreement. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Me.
All right. We move now to our next submitter, uh,
tribal Authority Incorporated.
You, uh, also joining us via Zoom
Kilda.
Good morning. Morning. You can hear us right?
Excellent. All right.
Welcome back before the
committee, uh, we've seen your submission.
We have 10 minutes sit down for you this
morning, over to you.
Kilda Tim,
just going, going to go cut to the chase
'cause I know everybody's, um, very busy.
Uh, but first of all, I did want to, on behalf of P Dako,
uh, tribal Authority recognize the, the expertise, uh,
from the free, the previous speaker, um,
and we support 100%, um, everything, uh,
that he, uh, said today.
Um, from, I just want to go quickly
to the engagement process in regards to Iwi.
I, when I was in 2016,
following the TPPA agreement, um, was charged
with pulling together BO actually, um, its Maori
and Iwi engagement process.
Um, and so I bring that, um, uh, to the table
as well in understanding fully, uh,
what the tribunal at the time recommended in relation to
and the plant variety rights, um, issues that were, uh,
that formed a very, very strong part of the Iwi
and Maori, um, challenge, uh, to TPPA.
And its subsequent, um, uh, uh,
the following sort of, um, a part of that as well.
Um, at the outset, I just wanna say that as perko,
we are firmly opposed, uh,
to the United Arab Emirate Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement.
Um, we are, uh, it must be understood a trade hapu.
We are placed on the, uh, doorstep, if you like,
of the toga harbor.
Um, and that gives us very strong interests in the, uh, port
of toga, um, understanding that, um, that port, um, along
with others, um, provide a bloodline, uh, for, uh,
international trade.
Um, across the, um, across the country,
we've lost confidence in the government, uh, due
to the 185 years or rather of the trauma.
And this, what this does is it continues to dispossess, um,
iwi and Maori, uh, in particular as well, um,
of the, uh, well,
it dispossesses us of our issues, uh, to be,
um, talked about in a way that gives confidence to the, uh,
principles of the Treaty of Huang.
We all know how that's going at the
moment with this government.
Um, it's concerning that the government seeks
to initiate international partnerships, uh,
without the consent of not just its natural treaty partner
Iwi and Maori, but with Iwi and with with Maori.
Absolutely. Uh,
and this, uh, agreement it covers
its surrounding Oceans KO is part of, uh, iwi Maori face,
significant risks, uh, to our rights
and interests within, um,
and climate change being one of them, uh, TGA
or natural resources, uh, that, uh, are also, uh,
a huge issue for us indigenous biodiversity.
When we, um, look at the harbors, for example, the amount
of stuff that comes in, um, to our harbor, uh,
from overseas, um, is incredibly, um, damaging.
We have the Asian crab in our harbor at the moment.
Now, while that's not significantly related to this, it, uh,
there is a, um, uh, a relationship, I guess from
the whole sort of landscape where we are starting
to open up, uh, trade agreements with, with, with countries
that might not, uh, look
after our interests in much the same way as we do for ve.
While the IPEC
and TC Chapter acknowledges the importance
of iwi Maori wellbeing, we think, uh,
it falls short in some critical areas.
Uh, the recognition of wellbeing from a te
Maori perspective is commendable,
but it has to be matched with concrete, um,
actions and protections.
This can't be within, um, can't be, uh,
a mere written agreement, uh, um, that excludes active parti
participation and consent, uh, from Iwi Maori.
The explicit, uh, protection of Manuka is, um,
is important given its cultural significance.
Uh, but we question why it's been favored without
meaningful engagement.
Uh, with Iwi and Maori, uh, the trans Alpine Organic honey,
a settler industry developed over 130 years exemplifies
the type of protection, sought and trade agreements.
However, it's masked as culturally, uh, significant
as the largest producer of organic, uh,
Monica Honey Trans Alpines Market dominance highlights the
government's prioritization of a large scale enterprise
for others over equitable iwi Maori participation.
The labeling of Monica, uh,
as an indigenous product is correct,
but it's explicit naming within the Indi with,
with an indigenous is misleading.
If it doesn't benefit iwi, uh, Maori
and, uh, offer us more favorable outcomes to truly honor te,
there must be a genuine partnership with Iwi Maori, um,
ensuring that our voices are central in
that decision making process.
I'll go back to the point I raised earlier.
Um, met, um, has access to
which it is, it's its own, um, Maori, I think,
advisory board that was established following the Ang
Tribunal's reports, uh, into TPPA in 2016 to help increase
its own internal capability in respect of, uh, trade,
especially around FDAs.
Now, Maui raised, uh, a very good point, uh,
in his submission, and it's one
that we absolutely agree with.
It's that, um, that committee is appointed by the Crown, um,
and, um, the,
the experts on there are experts in their own right.
Um, but, uh, there still needs to be,
uh, it still needs to be populated.
We think, um, if it's to be a true partnership by iwi, uh,
Maori partners as well.
There's no evidence, uh, from what I can see
that shows significant engagements with that body, um,
that body's work.
Uh, I know because I helped design it, um, its role is
to work around and, um, engage, uh,
with its iwi, uh, Maori partners.
Um, the recommendations are there for you to read.
Um, you've got the paper.
Uh, I am happy to take some questions.
Excellent. Right. Thank you
for your comments this morning.
Have we, any questions for Mr. Aki? Dr. Lauren Nan,
Thank you Chair.
Um, thank you, uh, Jason, for your submission.
I really want to pick up on a rather theme
that both in your submission in, I took
for KA on the submission, it is around intellectual property
and benefits to SMEs.
Um, what do you think,
because I accept that, you know, from both, um,
your perspective and, uh, ND W's perspective
that it's not sufficient,
but what do you think is the tangible harm
or harmful outcome it will result from
if we continuing having trade agreements
that does not take intellectual properties and SMEs or ipu
or Maori SMEs into account?
Yeah, so I mean, that, that's a very good question.
Um, as we know, uh, as, um, as Maori, as Iwi, um,
have been engaged in international trade since the,
since the arrival of, of, of the settlers to this country.
And so we do have an historical understanding
of the importance of trade, um, not just, um, in, in
inside domestically,
but also, um, externally in order for us to get back to
that, um, to that place where we are trading successfully
and our interests are being acknowledged in a way
that represents a, uh, a uniquely indigenous Maori voice
that requires a conversation, well,
more than a conversation actually, it requires a very, very,
um, purposeful, um, conversation with Iwi with Maori.
And it's not as if we don't have the mechanisms for that
to take place, because we do the Iwi Chairs forum has,
uh, numbers there.
Uh, Maui's group also has very good, um,
uh, acute, uh, sort of, um, insights into this, um,
Copa, um, insofar as it relates to, um, uh, the effect of,
uh, international trade agreements on Iwi and Maori.
We, what I'm trying to say is that we act,
we have been acting in this space
for a long time in the trade space.
SMEs, um, to, for example, Kiwi fruit is,
is we've got a bunch of, um, uh, Maori, um,
kiwi fruit owners, um, in the,
in the primary producing sector.
Um, you've got fomo, which represents a, a large number, um,
of Maori primary producers as well.
So that's what I'm saying. Um, we,
we do have a huge footprint in the space, own 10%
of the fishery, um, resource, um, a a large number
of the dairy resource, uh, forestry, for example.
Um, so it behooves, I think, uh, the, the crown,
the government to engage, um, with those bodies.
They're easy to find.
Okay, thank you. Uh, we've got time
for a question from the honorable penny. He,
Uh, I just quickly on the paka recommendations about the
removal of indigenous biodiversity, at what point
and in time do you think then if that was to happen, uh,
that the biodiversity would be back on the table given the
biodiversity is very different
across South Island,
And, and that was the key when I was involved
with pulling together the conversations, penny.
Um, there were key fundamental differences,
even in the honey industry, um, between the, um, honey
that's grown in the north, um, the honey
that's grown on the east coast of, uh, of the north island.
They are distinctly different varieties, um, of,
um, of produce.
Um, and they have different characteristics, um, as well.
So biodiversity formed a key part of the, um,
the, the plant variety rights, um, system as well that, um,
I think 21, um, provisions, uh,
provided for to give us, you know,
a lot more assurity around that.
It's a little bit of a shame that, you know, some
of our rights are more recognized from international bodies
rather than from our own own ones here.
Very good. All right.
Thank you very much for your submission this morning.
Appreciate it. Right. We'll move on to our next submitter.
Our next submission will be from the NZ
International Business Forum.
Good morning, Steven.
Good morning. Good morning. Excellent. All right.
Welcome along to the committee this morning.
We look forward to hearing your submission
and support of your written submission,
which we've received on the NZUA epa.
We have 10 minutes set down for you this morning. Thank you.
Uh, um,
Koto Tato, I seem to be bathed in sunshine here.
I'm in the sunny, um, Hawke's Bay tomato Maui,
where the sun always shines.
Uh, and it's a great pleasure, uh, to join you today
and thank you chair for this opportunity.
I'm joining you on behalf of the members
of the New Zealand International Business Forum
and Export New Zealand, which is, as you know,
a division of business New Zealand.
I serve as the executive director
of the New Zealand International Business Forum.
I'm an advisory board member of Export New Zealand.
I'm sorry, my colleague Josh Tan, the executive director
of Export New Zealand, can't join us today,
but he has entrusted me with this, uh, task
to deliver, uh, these comments.
As you'll have seen, our submission is a joint one, uh,
and between us, we represent New Zealand exporters, large,
small, and medium sized, all across Al Tua.
We are strongly in support of ratification
of New Zealand's latest FTA, the SEPA
with the United Arab Emirates colleagues.
This is a high quality, comprehensive,
and ambitious agreement, the negotiation
of which has been concluded in record time,
and we are grateful to trade Minister McClay
and to his officials for the excellent work.
As our submission notes,
this agreement will provide comprehensive tariff elimination
within a rapid timeframe timeframe.
Now, currently applied tariffs in the UAE against
New Zealand are not high, uh,
but there is with this agreement
and opportunity to grow further New Zealand exporters, uh,
exports, especially in the dairy, red meat, seafood,
horticulture, high value foods, and agritech sectors.
And it should likewise create new opportunity
for UAE goods in our own market and for services
and through the companion bilateral investment treaty,
greater flows of foreign direct investment into our market.
In terms of the trade rules the agreement provides,
the CPA provides all the elements we would normally want
to see from a high quality agreement,
very much along the lines of New Zealand's,
other high quality agreements, particularly C-P-T-P-P
and the New Zealand UK FTA.
And that includes provisions, uh, designed to ensure
that trade is both sustainable and inclusive.
And we are pleased to see that the right of governments
to regulate for legitimate public policy reasons
and the ability of the government
to meet the crown's obligations
to Maori have been safeguarded.
As you will know, the SIPPA has been instrumental also in
securing, uh, a long sought
after FDA with the members
of the wider Gulf Cooperation Council,
and we look forward to this agreement coming
before the committee for ratification.
Now, you may have noted that in paragraph 28
of our submission,
we welcome the government's provisions aimed at delivering
end-to-end, secure and trusted paperless trade.
These provisions are largely aspirational in nature,
and the chapter is not enforceable.
Um, it they largely mirror other undertakings
in other trade agreements.
New Zealand has entered into
paperless trade is a key interest for us.
Paperless trade refers to replacing the vast amounts
of paper that move around the world, a company
and goods as they move through supply chains.
Replacing paper with the trusted exchange of data
can reduce costs, improve security,
and provide information for regulators and consumers alike.
It's the sort of thing New Zealand can
and should be doing as part of a packet package of measures
to double export value.
Unfortunately, I have to say
that it remains a disappointment for both our organizations
that success of New Zealand governments have so far failed
to take the steps necessary
to towards devising a national strategy, uh,
to implement paperless trade.
Sutter's strategy is not without complication,
it requires legislative change, engagement
with trade partners
and boosting the capability of businesses.
We urge the government now to follow
through on the various undertakings
to implement paperless trade as a number
of our trading partners are doing, such as Singapore,
the uk, and Australia.
Not to do so could leave New Zealand
behind in the international trading space chair.
Members of the committee, uh, the New Zealand UAE SEPA
may not be a transformational agreement in terms
of its impact on our economy.
That's because the market is largely open already,
but it is a very good agreement,
and I think one we can be proud of that
with your endorsement.
The SEPA will come into effect at a time when we are facing
a sharp increase in protectionism in the form
of tariffs threatened or otherwise.
And other trade barriers around the world
is very significant indeed.
It shows that there are still economies
who believe in the values of openness,
effective trade rules, and economic integration.
And for the reasons set out in our submission, we recommend
that the committee indicate its support
for the prompt ratification
of the New Zealand United Arab Emirates.
Uh, SEPA ate.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for your submission this morning.
I just wanted to pick up on a couple of points under 16,
you note that UA E is consuming 12% more food each year,
which I think is an impressive growth rate,
but that our exports have been static.
So I guess that highlights the potential
opportunity there as well.
Um, but really interested if you could just delve a bit more
into, uh, what you've highlighted under point 30 in relation
to the investor state dispute settlement, uh,
and your disappointment
that we have not included that aspect.
Can you expand on that a bit for us, please?
Yes. Well, thank you for that. Um, just in relation
to your first comment, I think that this issue around, um,
you know, being able to link up with the uae, you know,
food strategies extremely important
and it shows why this agreement is going to be necessary
above the, the sort of tiff treatment we face at the moment,
including for securing our trade in the long term.
On the question of investor state dispute settlement,
I mean, this is something on which we don't agree
with the government, neither this one, uh, or the last one.
Uh, so there you go.
We are really, are really an independent body.
I mean, our thought about this,
and this is a very, uh, controversial area, uh, I, I agree,
but our thought about this is that investment protections
are required, uh, to protect investors against, you know,
the non-legitimate action of governments in related relation
to their investments, in particular, their,
their private property.
You know, it's not for a moment that we are suggesting
that any New Zealand government would act like this,
but there are lots of instances in other governments acting
like this around the world that could and on occasion,
but not very often affect New Zealand's
investments overseas.
So we think investor state dispute settlement is simply a
part and parcel of the normal things you would include in an
investment treaty to stimulate, promote, uh,
further foreign direct investment.
Very good. Alright, Dr.
Laurens, may I ask a supplementary question on top of
what you ask or you left, but Yep.
Okay. Far away. Um, very quickly, again, let's just, uh,
supplementary question on that.
Um, what's your view of the potentiality
that if we do have something like ISDS
that investors can hold a government ransom on certain
decisions as we see with the Clive Palmer lawsuit
of Australian government for $420 billion?
How do you mitigate that?
Uh, you mitigate it by devising ISDS, um, uh, provisions
that provide the continuing ability of governments
to regulate in the national interest
that exclude certain areas, uh, that are, um, deemed to be,
you know, of sufficient weight,
that those protections don't apply.
And it's all a matter about
how these things are, are constructed.
And there has been quite an evolution in the development
of ISDS procedures in overseas jurisdictions
where we've seen, uh, the sort of, um,
instances that you reference.
Um, these generally, you know,
date backed quite a long period of time.
Unfortunately, New Zealand hasn't been
for some time now in the business
of including these arrangements,
so we would be starting all over again.
I mean, this is a matter of, um, I I fully understand,
um, some controversy and controversy
and requiring discussion,
but nevertheless, not to include, um,
investment protections detract somewhat from the sort
of environment for foreign direct investment
that we are trying to create here in Alua.
I have time to ask my question very quickly.
Okay, go for it. Okay. Um, thank you for your submission.
And you mentioned something, you mentioned digital economy
as one of them, as we know that, you know,
often government legislation policies do not move as fast
as large tech companies,
and particularly when we see the continued politicization
of the tech industry between let's say US China,
how do you sort of deal with the tension of us having,
and you mentioned Singapore, how do you deal
with the tension of the politicization
of tech in our digital commerce and the protection of data
because of how it could be used by large tech giants?
That, that is a very good question,
and I think it is at the forefront, uh,
of negotiators concerns when they're negotiating these
digital economy, uh, chapters.
That's why, largely speaking, they're not enforceable
and are aspirational, uh, in, in nature in the context of a,
of a trade agreement I'm talking about.
Uh, and, um, you know, again, I think it's about, uh,
making sure that we are ahead of the game when it comes to
devising digital economy, uh, provisions.
You'll know that New Zealand is a founder member
of the Digital Economy Partnership Agreement, uh, which is,
um, designed precisely in many respects
to address that particular problem.
It includes a whole, uh, series of, um, steps designed
to work with our trading partners to divine, to devise rules
that are fit for the current environment.
But you're right, this is a fast moving, uh, area.
Our interest here relates mostly to, um,
and I'm talking about our exporters interest relates mostly
to paperless trade, which we really wish the New Zealand
government would get a move on, uh, with, um,
putting in place and the risk not to doing so, as I said is
that we just, uh, fall behind.
So, uh, this is an area that I think warrants a lot, uh,
you know, further attention and consideration.
Thank you. Excellent. All right.
Thank you very much for your time this morning, Mr. Jacob.
Be, we, we have heard loud
and clear your views on the paperless trade.
Thank you for taking the time to indeed
for us. Indeed. Appreciate it.
Yo, thank you very much.
Thank you. Okay, members, we'll move
to our final submission for the morning.
We joined online by Jane Kelsey.
Morning, professor Kelsey, how are you? Excellent.
We've received your submission. You can take that as read.
Uh, we have 10 minutes allocated for your submission today,
and there may be questions
if you wish to leave time for that.
Thank you.
Uh, ki chair. Well, as you will know from the letters
that you've received,
I do not accept 10 minutes is the limit on
my submission,
and I give a heads up, uh, to the committee
that the ongoing refusal to take the
International Treaty examination as seriously as it needs
to be, is about to be escalated into
a much bigger discussion.
Um, I took the advantage of this
submission on the UAE, uh, to
remind the committee that in making submissions
as I have done for 30 plus years
of my international standing to analyze the agreement
and to challenge the national interest analysis prepared
by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Trade to justify the agreement that NIA
as my submission shows, uh, is misleading in a number
of places, particularly pertinent
to my expertise in this instance, is that,
um, I was invited by, uh, Dr.
Kearney, the minister of, uh, state for foreign trade
from the United Arab Emirates, who was also responsible for,
uh, this agreement from the UAE side to be one
of six people, the others,
including a former director general
of the World Trade Organization to advise Dr.
Tanni on the UA e's hosting
of the WTO Ministerial Conference last year.
And I was invited to attend that conference
as his guest.
So this is not just a busy body
academic seeking to throw a spanner in the works.
I have deep knowledge
and recognized international expertise in this area
that the committee, um, needs to pay more heed to
because MFAs NIA is deeply problematic
in relation to this agreement.
Um, I've been particularly aware, uh,
that both the UAE
and the New Zealand Minister of Trade have
set as objectives securing as many agreements as possible
as quickly as possible.
The agreements therefore become a matter of optics
rather than a matter of substance.
And that is especially evident if we look at a number
of core aspects of, um, how MFA seeks
to justify the agreement.
If we look at the NIA, we see
the dilemmas when the
prescriptions are
largely uncontested.
Now, as, as Mai Solomon said, yes, uh,
there was a treaty assessment from
that is printed at the end of the NIA,
but that is not in any way influencing
MFA's thinking about this.
Part of the problem with this agreement was
that not only when negotiations conducted in secret,
there were cursory public consultations,
but those of us who did see the text in
that three month period
and have an opportunity
to input back on it under strict confidentiality in my case
as an advisor to we're not in fact able
to take those issues out to get advice
and feedback into the process.
And it is therefore not a process in itself
that can carry social license and legitimacy.
But if we look at some of the details of it, we, we see some
of the consequences of MFA writing the, the narrative.
And it was interesting that my old friend, Stephen Jacoby,
even admitted that there was very little in this agreement
commercially, uh, for them.
So if we are looking at the, the current 2023 level
of trade, uh, with the UAE,
we are looking at 1.1% of New Zealand's global exports.
If we are looking at the quantum overall as
MFA highlights of New Zealand's FTAs
that will now be covered, um, sorry, new Zealand's exports
that will now be covered by FTAs, that carries
with it an implication that FTAs somehow contribute to
economic growth and export growth.
Yet if we look at the data,
and I've been looking at the OECD data on this,
new Zealand's exports have actually fallen as a proportion
of GDP over recent years as we've been accumulating FTAs.
There is no direct correlation, it's there
as implied in the NIA.
Moreover, the areas that are identified as
of interest in relation to the UAE such as areas of
of red meat and dairy are areas
where we are already largely at saturation.
We are not gonna be expanding domestic production of those.
So that means that whatever might end up going
to the UAE is gonna be trade diversion, not trade creation.
If we go beyond that, the notion of tariff savings here
that could be 42.6 million is misleading in terms of
what those so-called tariff savings actually mean.
It's not money in the pocket of exporters.
It's potentially lower prices in the UAE if the tariff
cuts are in fact asked on to consumers.
And if consumers choice leads them to buy more
of New Zealand's exports, yet, not in the summary,
but down in page 84 of the NIA, we see the concession
that in fact the majority of New Zealand's exports
to the UAE are actually under a a duty
exemption program anyway.
So we've got a lot of smokes, smoke
and mirrors going on here.
We need to start looking much more distinctively at
what these agreements actually do
and do not do, how much resource we are putting into them
for what, and I note that, for example,
in the government procurement area, the UAE has has, uh,
reserved the right of a 10% premium to advantage.
Its SMEs. New Zealand doesn't have any equivalent of
that, that might actually provide some potential new
opportunities in the procurement area if we actually know
what purchasing might be involved with the UAE.
And we don't have that empirical data.
But if we are looking, say at Maori enterprises,
Maori enterprises, uh, are predominantly SMEs,
why can't we have similar kinds of, um,
advantages in our procurement?
Largely, I suspect
because we've already given away the right to do
that in the WTO gp, um, area, let me talk about,
uh, investment and services.
Um, as one who has a, a long history
of working on investor state dispute settlement, unlike Mr.
Jacoby, I'm extremely pleased
to see this government continuing the position
of no ISDS and new agreements.
I have been for a number of years, uh, a, an accredited,
uh, participant in the unset trial working group three
review of ISDS that meets in both Vienna
and New York, uh, where the crisis
of legitimacy in ISDS is forced to rethink on that.
But when we are looking at, at the realities of ISDS, now,
it is in fact a a a pariah, uh,
in many international agreements.
The eu, for example, has just, uh,
decided regionally on top of a number of,
of member state decisions to withdraw from, uh, several
of the agreements that have ISDS
because the majority
of ISDS disputes at present are geared towards natural
resources and towards climate change strategies.
And they are designed exactly as, uh, uh,
as the green party, uh, members said, uh,
to chill governments by threatening
to bring very expensive disputes against governments if they
proceed with those policies in other areas.
In, um, the investment chapter, it is disappointing
to see us continuing, uh, to celebrate the
restrictions on so-called performance requirements.
We call them trade related investment measures in,
in the trade context.
And that prevents us, for example, in areas like forestry
requiring a certain amount of local content
and local processing of our locks
that currently get exported hol us, uh, off the ports
to get the value add in other countries.
Shane Jones encountered this problem, uh, when he was trying
to get, um, more milling done in in some of the, um,
uh, mills especially, and,
and FAT said, you got a problem there.
We've got issues as well in the services chapter.
Um, I raised the question around water and water bottling.
We'd finally got in fact to agree that the, um, commitments
that have been making on environmental services,
which cover measures that effect foreign supply of services,
uh, as it related to water needed
to include in the protections, the right to constrain,
uh, the transfer, for example,
of water rights from an agriculture purpose
to a water bottling purpose.
It did that in the U-A-E-F-D-A.
It has not carried that through into this agreement.
If we'd had more time, we would have dealt with that.
Um, SPS sanitary and phyto sanitary measures
and technical barriers to trade.
Of course those are really important
to New Zealand agricultural exporters.
We know that. But at the same time, the kind of standards
that are being promoted, the foreclose, the ability
for example, of organics
and Maori producers, uh, to be able to apply their
standards, we are especially concerned, um,
and I say this as a num, one
of a number who've just made submissions on the gene
technology bill that in relation to the UAE,
about 40% of food in the UAE is genetically modified,
and that will include elements of
what they might export to New Zealand.
There is a provision in the gene technology bill for there
to be over recognition of overseas certification.
There are concerns not only about what that will mean here,
for example, for the organics exporters
and in the gene technology bill MB rejected, looking at
what the, uh, trade impacts of these agreements, uh, uh, uh,
sorry, what the trade impacts of certification
of GE would mean for our exporters.
MFA said it should be a consideration. MB said no.
If we are looking at that in this context, we need
to know from MFA what the consequences might be.
And if a future government decides to try to roll back some
of the ge, we will face the problems
that Mexico has just faced in an SPS case brought by, uh,
the US when it tried to increase those protections.
And it lost and it lost not only on the general exceptions
not applying, but the indigenous people's exception,
which is actually stronger than the Treaty
of Wai exception in relation to digital.
Mr. Jacoby is wrong.
Most of our agreements are not unenforceable.
The only digital trade chapter
that is unenforceable is in the RCEP,
which has now been effectively overtaken
by the enforceable chapter in the A CN Australia
and New Zealand FTA. We are right.
Unfortunately, we're over time Professor Kelsey,
but we appreciate your insights into the agreement, uh,
and we have seen your written
submission to that effect as well.
I have about five minutes more that I would
Speak this morning. We appreciate that,
and that is the end
of submissions on this hearing.
Thank you.
You will hear more.